resources: Refactor arm and x86 disk image directories (#38)
gem5/gem5-resources: src/ubuntu-generic-diskimages/BUILDING.md

---
title: Building the base x86-ubuntu and arm-ubuntu image for Ubuntu 22.04 and 24.04
authors:
    - Harshil Patel
---

This document provides instructions to create the "x86-ubuntu" image and "arm-ubuntu" image.
This image can be a 22.04 or 24.04 Ubuntu image.

## Directory map

- `files`: Files that are copied to the disk image.
- `scripts`: Scripts run on the disk image after installation.

> - `http`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for different versions of ubuntu for arm and x86.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `http`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for different versions of Ubuntu for Arm and x86.
```

  - `arm-22-04`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for arm ubuntu 22.04 image.
  - `arm-24-04`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for arm ubuntu 24.04 image.
  - `x86`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for x86 ubuntu 22.04 and 24.04 images.
- `x86-disk-image-24.04`: Disk image output directory for x86 ubuntu 24.04 image.
- `x86-disk-image-22.04`: Disk image output directory for x86 ubuntu 22.04 image.
- `arm-disk-image-24.04`: Disk image output directory for arm ubuntu 24.04 image.
- `arm-disk-image-22.04`: Disk image output directory for arm ubuntu 22.04 image.

## Disk Image

Run `build-x86.sh` with the argument `22.04` or `24.04` to build the respective x86 disk image in the `ubuntu-generic-diskimages` directory.
Run `build-arm.sh` with the argument `22.04` or `24.04` to build the respective arm disk image in the `ubuntu-generic-diskimages` directory.

> Building the arm image assume that we are on an ARM machine as we use kvm to build the image.

Reviewer: Add info about how to build Arm disk images without using KVM

    - Harshil Patel
---

This document provides instructions to create the "x86-ubuntu" image and "arm-ubuntu" image.
This image can be a 22.04 or 24.04 Ubuntu image.

## Directory map

- `files`: Files that are copied to the disk image.
- `scripts`: Scripts run on the disk image after installation.
- `http`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for ubuntu 22.04.

> - `http-24.04`: cloud-init Ubuntu autoinstall files for ubuntu 24.04.

Reviewer 2: What about x86 24.04? There's no files for that.

Author: We dont have separate user-data for x86 22.04 and 24.04

## Kernel

For the x86 disk images a kernel is also extracted from the disk image during the post-installation process.
The latest headers and modules are installed using apt, before extracting the kernel using the `extract-vmlinux` script provided in ubuntu. The extracted kernel is placed at `/home/gem5/vmlinux-x86-ubuntu` in the disk image.

> The extracted kernel does not have a version its name, but the kernel version is printed as before the extraction in `post-installation.sh` script. This extracted kernel can be used as a resource for gem5 simulations and is not limited to just be used with this disk image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extracted kernel does not have a version in its name, but the kernel version is printed before the extraction in `post-installation.sh` script. This extracted kernel can be used as a resource for gem5 simulations and is not limited to just be used with this disk image.
```

  - The `gem5-bridge exit` command is run after the linux kernel initialization by default.
  - If the `no_systemd` boot option is passed, systemd is not run and the user is dropped to a terminal.
  - If the `interactive` boot option is passed, the `gem5-bridge exit` command is not run after the linux kernel initialization.
- Networking is disabled by moving the `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml` file to `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml.bak`. The `systemd-networkd-wait-online.service` is also disabled.

>   - If you want to enable networking, you need to modify the disk image and move the file `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml.bak` to `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml`.

Reviewer: Clarify which disk images these files correspond to

> - Networking is disabled by moving the `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml` or `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` file to `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml.bak` or `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml.bak` respectively. The `systemd-networkd-wait-online.service` is also disabled.

Reviewer: Clarify which .yaml corresponds with which category of disk images.

  - If the `interactive` boot option is passed, the `gem5-bridge exit` command is not run after the linux kernel initialization.
- Networking is disabled by moving the `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml` or `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` file to `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml.bak` or `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml.bak` respectively. The `systemd-networkd-wait-online.service` is also disabled.
  - If you want to enable networking, you need to modify the disk image and move the file `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml.bak` or `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml.bak` to `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml` or `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` depending on which config file the disk image contains.
  To re-enable `systemd-networkd-wait-online.service`, first, unmask the service with `sudo systemctl unmask systemd-networkd-wait-online.service` and then enable the service to start with `sudo systemctl enable systemd-networkd-wait-online.service`.
  If you require the service to start immediately without waiting for the next boot then also run the following:
  `sudo systemctl start systemd-networkd-wait-online.service`.

> ## Extending the Disk Image

Reviewer 2: I think you should remove this line. You are not describing *how* to extend the disk image. You are describing the changes we have made to the disk image.

### Customization of the boot Processes

> - **Replace `gem5_init.sh`**: This script is what executes as the Linux init process (pid=0) immediately after Linux boot. If you have a custom initialization script, replace the default `gem5_init.sh` in the packer file that you are using such as the `x86-ubuntu.pkr.hcl` and `post-installation.sh` to integrate your custom initialization process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`gem5_init.sh` replaces /sbin/init**: This script is what executes as the Linux init process (pid=0) immediately after Linux boot. This script....
```

  chmod u+s /path/to/gem5-bridge
  ```

## Extending the disk image with custom files and scripts

- You can add more packages to the disk image by updating the `post-installation.sh` script.
- To add files from host to the disk image you can add a file provisioner with source as path in host and destination as path in the image.

```hcl
provisioner "file" {
    destination = "/home/gem5/"
    source      = "path/to/files"
  }
```

> If you need to increase the size of the image when adding more libraries and files to the image update the size of partition in the respective `user-data` file. Also, update the `disk_size` parameter to be atleast one mega byte more than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to increase the size of the image when adding more libraries and files to the image update the size of the partition in the respective `http/*/user-data` file. Also, update the `disk_size` parameter in `post-installation.sh` to be at least one mega byte more than
```

the size you defined in the `user-data` file.

**NOTE:** You can extend this disk image by modifying the `post-installation.sh` script, but it requires building the image from scratch.

> To take a pre-built image and add new files or packages, see the post in gem5 discussion.

Reviewer: Add link to the gem5 discussion

Author: I added the link to the documentation but it is still in PR form, the link should work as soon as it is merged.

  chmod u+s /path/to/gem5-bridge
  ```

> ### Adding more libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Extending the disk image with custom files and scripts
```

> - You can add more libraries to the disk image by updating the `post-installation.sh` script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You can add more packages to the disk image by updating the `post-installation.sh` script.
```

- To add files from host to the disk image you can add a file provisioner with source as path in host and destination as path in the image.

```hcl
provisioner "file" {
    destination = "/home/gem5/"
    source      = "path/to/files"
  }
```

If you need to increase the size of the image when adding more libraries and files to the image update the size of partition in the respective `user-data` file. Also, update the `disk_size` parameter to be atleast one mega byte more than
the size you defined in the `user-data` file.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **NOTE:** You can extend this disk image by modifying the `post-installation.sh` script, but it requires building the image from scratch.
> To take a pre-built image and add new files or packages, see examples in ....
```

- **Determine QEMU Arguments**: Identify the QEMU arguments required for booting the system. These vary by ISA and mirror the arguments used for booting a disk image in QEMU.
- **Directory Organization**: Arrange your source directory to include the `user-data` file and any additional content. Utilize the `provisioner` section for transferring extra files into the disk image, ensuring all necessary resources are embedded within your custom disk image.

## Arm image specific changes

We need a EFI file to boot the arm image. We use the file named `flash0.img` in the packer file.

To get the `flash0.img` run the following commands in the `files` directory

```bash
dd if=/dev/zero of=flash0.img bs=1M count=64

> dd if=/usr/share/qemu-efi-aarch64/QEMU_EFI.fd of=flash0.img conv=notrunc

Reviewer 2: Why can't you just use `/usr/share/qemu-efi-aarch64/QEMU_EFI.fd`? Why do you have to copy that file in such a strange way?

Author: We do this because we need it to be 64MB with 0s if the file is smaller.

- **Determine QEMU Arguments**: Identify the QEMU arguments required for booting the system. These vary by ISA and mirror the arguments used for booting a disk image in QEMU.
- **Directory Organization**: Arrange your source directory to include the `user-data` file and any additional content. Utilize the `provisioner` section for transferring extra files into the disk image, ensuring all necessary resources are embedded within your custom disk image.

## Arm image specific changes

We need a EFI file to boot the arm image. We use the file named `flash0.img` in the packer file.

To get the `flash0.img` run the following commands in the `files` directory

```bash

> dd if=/dev/zero of=flash0.img bs=1M count=64

Reviewer: Can the commands to get flash0.img be incorporated into build-arm.sh and/or be mentioned in the "## Disk Image" section of the document? The commands are listed after information about how to customize the disk image, so it may be difficult for users to figure out that they need to run them.

Author: Moved the section to the `## Disk Image` section.
